Alex Perez
Date:06/29/26

Part 1

a. How is a new array to be sorted created?
A new array is created in by the create_new_array() method. It uses a list to build random integers between 0 
and the preferences.MAX_VAL, with length equal to the requested size.

b. When is the new array created? (Hint: controller.py may be helpful)
The new array is created inside the restart after the algorithm is chosen and the generator is initialized.
In the program, that happens when the controller handles key presses for selection, insertion, bubble, or reset.
Keyboards are S, I, B, R.

c. In your own words, what does the yield keyword do in selection_sort()? (For a brief
description, see here).
The yield keyword turns selection sort() into a generator. It pauses the function, send back the current pair
of the indices to the caller, and remembers where it left off so the next call can continue from that exact point.

d. In your own words, what is the relationship between selection_sort() and
get_next_step()?
In selection sort() defines the sequence of visualization steps, while get_next_step() advances that sequence one step
at a time. In other words, selection_sort() is the "recipe" and get_next_step() is the part that executes 
the next recipe step.

e. In the display.py file, you will see that the draw() function takes two different
arguments (in addition to self). What are these, and when are they updated such
that draw() displays the most current step of the algorithm?
draw() takes the current arra() plus two index values: outer_idx() and inner_idx. These are updated by 
get_next_step() each time the algorithm advances, and the display is redrawn with those newest values do the screen
shows the mos current highlighted step.

Part 2. Sort selection

a. At a high level, what is the approach that selection sort takes to sort the items of the
list? (i.e., why is it called selection sort?)
It repeatedly scans the unsorted part of the list to find the smallest value, then swaps that value into the next
position in the sorted part. It is called "selection sort" because each pass "selects" the minimum remaining item and
places it in its final position.
b. What is the time complexity (i.e., runtime) of selection sort (Big O notation)? How
can you tell just by looking at the code?
its time complexity is O(n^2). You  an tell from the nested loops: the outer loop runs about n times,
and for each pass the inner loop checks nearly all remaining elements, so the total number of comparisons is 
about (n(n-1)/2).
c. What is the space complexity (i.e., additional storage usage) of selection sort (Big O
notation)? How can you tell just by looking at the code?
Its space complexity is O(1) extra space. You can tell because it sorts the list in place and only uses a few 
constant-size varaibles such as indices and a temporary swap value; it does not create a new array of size n.

Part 3. Insertion_sort
a. At a high level, what is the approach that insertion sort takes to sort the items of the
list? (i.e., why is it called insertion sort?)
Insertion sort builds the sorted list one item at a time. It starts with the first element as "sorted," then 
takes each next element and inserts it into the correct position amoing the earlier elements by shifting larger
values to the right. It is called insertion sort because each new item is placed into its proper place in the 
already sorted portion.
b. What is the time complexity (i.e., runtime) of insertion sort (Big O notation)? How
can you tell just by looking at the pseudocode?
The time complexity is O(n^2). You can tell because the outer loop runs through the list, and for each element the
inner while loop may compare and shift it left through many earlier positions. In the worst case, that means
about n^2/2 operations which is still O(n^2).
c. What is the space complexity (i.e., additional storage usage) of insertion sort (Big O
notation)? How can you tell just by looking at the pseudocode
The space complexity is O(1) extra space. You can tell because the algorithm sorts the list in place using only a few
variables like i, j, and temporary swap values; it does not need to create a new array of size n.

Part 4. Bubble_sort
a. At a high level, what is the approach that insertion sort takes to sort the items of the
list? (i.e., why is it called bubble sort?)
Bubble sort repeatedly compares neighboring items and swaps them if they are out of order. Larger values
"bubble" toward the end if the list after each pass.
b. What is the time complexity (i.e., runtime) of bubble sort (Big O notation)? How can
you tell just by looking at the pseudocode?
The time complexity is O(n^2) because there is a nested loop: the outer loop runs thorugh the list, and
the inner loop compares many neighboring pairs.
c. What is the space complexity (i.e., additional storage usage) of bubble sort (Big O
notation)? How can you tell just by looking at the pseudocode?
The space complexity is O(1) because it sorts in-place and only uses a few extra variables like i and j.

Part 4.4 Give AI a Prompt to write bubble_sort code in python
a. What tool are you using (e.g., ChatGPT, Claude)?
I used Chatgpt for this.
b. What prompt did you input?
Prompt: “Write a Python bubble_sort function that sorts a list in-place without using Python’s built-in sort."
c. What was the output code it provided?
def bubble_sort(self):
    """An implementation of the Bubble Sort algorithm."""
    n = len(self.array)

    for i in range(n - 1):
        for j in range(n - 1 - i):
            yield j, j + 1

            if self.array[j] > self.array[j + 1]:
                self.array[j], self.array[j + 1] = self.array[j + 1], self.array[j]
                yield j, j + 1

This was the code it privided me with chatgpt
d. Does the function run in-place (i.e., does it create or return a new list)?
Yes, it runs in-place because it modifies self.array directly and does not create or return a new list.
e. What similarities and differences do you notice between the version given by the
tool and the pseudocode provided in 1?
It is similar to the pseudocode because it uses nested loops, compares A[j] and A[j+1], and swaps them when needed. 
It is different because it uses self.array instead of A, and it uses yield instead of print(A) 
so the GUI can show each step.
f. What, if anything would you would have done differently if you had written the
function yourself?
I would add comments and yield statements so the sorting process can be visualized clearly.

PART 5: Compare the Algorithms (Answers for this portion)
a. How long does selection_sort() take to sort 100 items? 1,000? 10,000?
100 items: 0.000815 seconds
1,000 items: 0.147 seconds
10,000 items: 9.01 seconds
b. How long does insertion_sort() take to sort 100 items? 1,000? 10,000?
100 items: 0.00129 seconds
1,000 items: 0.134 seconds
10,000 items: 14.27 seconds
c. How long does bubble_sort() take to sort 100 items? 1,000? 10,000?
100 items: 0.00154 seconds
1,000 items: 0.231 seconds
10,000 items: 19.96 seconds
d. What conclusion(s) can you draw about Big O time complexities based on these
runtimes, knowing that their Big O runtimes are the same?
Even though selection sort, insertion sort, and bubble sort all have O(n²) worst-case time complexity, 
their actual runtimes can still be different. Big O describes the general growth rate as the input size gets larger, 
but it does not show smaller details like how many swaps happen, how many comparisons happen, or how efficient 
the code is. Bubble sort is usually slower because it may do many repeated swaps. Selection sort usually 
does fewer swaps, and insertion sort can be faster when the list is already partly sorted. 
